# Working with IDS/IPS
Brief notes on the HackTheBox Academy module, Working with IDS/IPS, in the SOC Analyst learning path.

## Zeek Fundamentals
### Zeek's Operation Modes
Zeek operates in the following modes:

- Fully passive traffic analysis
- libpcap interface for packet capture
- Real-time and offline (e.g., PCAP-based) analysis
- Cluster support for large-scale deployments

### Zeek's Architecture
Zeek's architecture comprises two primary components: the event engine (or core) and the script interpreter.

The event engine takes an incoming packet stream and transforms it into a series of high-level events. In Zeek's context, these events describe network activity in policy-neutral terms, meaning they inform us of what's happening, but they don't offer an interpretation or evaluation of it.

Such interpretation or analysis is provided by Zeek's script interpreter, which executes a set of event handlers written in Zeek's scripting language (Zeek scripts). These scripts express the site's security policy, defining actions to be taken upon the detection of certain events.

Events generated by Zeek's core are queued in an orderly manner, awaiting their turn to be processed on a first-come, first-served basis. Most of Zeek's events are defined in .bif files located in the /scripts/base/bif/plugins/ directory.

### Zeek Logs
Among the diverse array of logs Zeek produces, some familiar ones include:

- conn.log: This log provides details about IP, TCP, UDP, and ICMP connections.
- dns.log: Here, you'll find the details of DNS queries and responses.
- http.log: This log captures the details of HTTP requests and responses.
- ftp.log: Details of FTP requests and responses are logged here.
- smtp.log: This log covers SMTP transactions, such as sender and recipient details.

It's noteworthy to mention that Zeek, in its standard configuration, applies gzip compression to log files every hour. The older logs are then transferred into a directory named in the YYYY-MM-DD format. When dealing with these compressed logs, alternative tools like gzcat for printing logs or zgrep for searching within logs can come in handy. However, Zeek also provides a specialized tool known as zeek-cut for handling log files. This utility accepts Zeek log files via standard input using pipelines or stream redirections and then delivers the specified columns to the standard output.

## Suricata Fundamentals
### Suricata Operation Modes

Suricata operates in four (4) distinct modes:

1. The Intrusion Detection System (IDS) mode positions Suricata as a silent observer. In this capacity, Suricata meticulously examines traffic, flagging potential attacks but refraining from any form of intervention. By providing an in-depth view of network activities and accelerating response times, this mode augments network visibility, albeit without offering direct protection.
2. In the Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) mode, Suricata adopts a proactive stance. All network traffic must pass through Suricata's stringent checks and is only granted access to the internal network upon Suricata's approval. This mode bolsters security by proactively thwarting attacks before they penetrate our internal network. Deploying Suricata in IPS mode demands an intimate understanding of the network landscape to prevent the inadvertent blocking of legitimate traffic. Furthermore, each rule activation necessitates rigorous testing and validation. While this mode enhances security, the inspection process may introduce latency.
3. The Intrusion Detection Prevention System (IDPS) mode brings together the best of both IDS and IPS. While Suricata continues to passively monitor traffic, it possesses the ability to actively transmit RST packets in response to abnormal activities. This mode strikes a balance between active protection and maintaining low latency, crucial for seamless network operations.
4. In its Network Security Monitoring (NSM) mode, Suricata transitions into a dedicated logging mechanism, eschewing active or passive traffic analysis or prevention capabilities. It meticulously logs every piece of network information it encounters, providing a valuable wealth of data for retrospective security incident investigations, despite the high volume of data generated.

### Configuring Suricata & Custom Rules
```
thossa00@htb[/htb]$ ls -lah /etc/suricata/rules/
```
Rules might be commented out, meaning they aren't loaded and don't affect the system. This usually happens when a new version of the rule comes into play or if the threat associated with the rule becomes outdated or irrelevant.

Each rule usually involves specific variables, such as $HOME_NET and $EXTERNAL_NET. The rule examines traffic from the IP addresses specified in the $HOME_NET variable heading towards the IP addresses in the $EXTERNAL_NET variable.

These variables can be defined in the suricata.yaml configuration file.
```
thossa00@htb[/htb]$ more /etc/suricata/suricata.yaml
```
Finally, to configure Suricata to load signatures from a custom rules file, such as local.rules in the /home/htb-student directory, we would execute the below.
```
thossa00@htb[/htb]$ sudo vim /etc/suricata/suricata.yaml
```

### Suricata Outputs
Suricata records a variety of data into logs that reside in the /var/log/suricata directory by default. For us to access and manipulate these logs, we require root-level access. Among these logs, we find the eve.json, fast.log, and stats.log files, which provide invaluable insight into the network activity. Let's delve into each:

1. eve.json: This file is Suricata's recommended output and contains JSON objects, each carrying diverse information such as timestamps, flow_id, event_type, and more. Try inspecting the content of old_eve.json residing at /var/log/suricata as follows.

If we wish to filter out only alert events, for example, we can utilize the jq command-line JSON processor as follows.

```
thossa00@htb[/htb]$ cat /var/log/suricata/old_eve.json | jq -c

# If we wish to identify the earliest DNS event, for example, we can utilize the jq command-line JSON processor as follows.

thossa00@htb[/htb]$ cat /var/log/suricata/old_eve.json | jq -c 'select(.event_type == "dns")' | head -1 | jq .
```

2. fast.log: This is a text-based log format that records alerts only and is enabled by default. Try inspecting the content of old_fast.log residing at /var/log/suricata as follows.

```
thossa00@htb[/htb]$ cat /var/log/suricata/old_fast.log
```

3. stats.log: This is a human-readable statistics log, which can be particularly useful while debugging Suricata deployments.

Suricata Key Features
Key features that bolster Suricata's effectiveness include:

- Deep packet inspection and packet capture logging
- Anomaly detection and Network Security Monitoring
- Intrusion Detection and Prevention, with a hybrid mode available
- Lua scripting
- Geographic IP identification (GeoIP)
- Full IPv4 and IPv6 support
- IP reputation
- File extraction
- Advanced protocol inspection
- Multitenancy

### Activity 1
```
thossa00@htb[/htb]$ cat /var/log/suricata/old_eve.json | jq -c 'select(.event_type == "http")' | head -1 | jq .

root@ubuntu: vim /etc/suricata/suricata.yaml

enable http-log on line 307

root@ubuntu:/etc/suricata/rules# suricata-update
root@ubuntu:/etc/suricata/rules# suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/suspicious.pcap
root@ubuntu:/etc/suricata/rules# cd /var/log/suricata
root@ubuntu:/var/log/suricata# cat http.log
```

## Suricata Rule Development Part 1
Samplee rule:
```
action protocol from_ip port -> to_ip port (msg:"Known malicious behavior, possible X malware infection"; content:"some thing"; content:"some other thing"; sid:10000001; rev:1;)
```
